OK folks! We initiated a new FAQ, but we became victims of our own success.
Why is that?
Because you asked 5,000 questions in total. I'll skip the details of whether you asked them on Youtube or Twitter or whatnot.
5,000 questions!
I don't know how to answer 5,000 questions!
So, we sorted and grouped them
and I won't even be able to answer all the questions I have in hand.
So, I'm wondering how I'm going to do it.
Should I give a written answer to the question I do not address here?
But I would have to find the person who is willing to do that.
So, do not take offense.
Picking questions is now close to be a lottery.
Of course we sort them by theme and then we look for the most straightforward questions.
It does not mean that we resent others.
It's just not possible!
How can someone physically answer 5,000 questions? It's not possible.
So I took a few of them...
So, here for example. @FishK asked the following question:
"In your program, you are apparently in favor of both individual freedom, and the freedom of decision over one's body."
"(Right to abortion, assisted suicide)"
OK!?
"But you are also against prostitution and surrogacy".
"These notions apparently contradict each other:"
"If I am free and have the freedom of decision over my own body, why would you forbid me to sell it or rent it?"
This is a logical question.
It obeys a principle of formal equality.
If you are free and have control over your own body,
why could someone tell you: "You can do whatever you want, except this and that!"?
Well let me tell you why.
There is no such thing as absolute freedom,
except the freedom of conscience, that is, the freedom to decide
All other types of freedom, no matter what they are, have limits.
To be precise, there are domains in which they do not apply.
For instance, you cannot drive at any speed in a street or in a city.
This was an example.
In a similar manner, the freedom of speech does not allow you to make racist comments
because it's not considered an opinion, but a crime.
So total, unlimited freedom does not exist, except for the freedom of conscience.
This is why my opinions don't contradict each other.
I practice freedom, and I propose to exercise it in the usual framework.
But you're right in saying that the decision to forbid this or that
contradicts the total freedom one could aspire to.
Why is that ?
It's because we are not alone.
If we were, we could do whatever we want.
But we're not, we live in a society.
Consequently, there are rules that apply to everyone.
And those rules are legitimate because we all decided on them — in theory!
That is, we have a democracy, we decide on rules,
and they apply to each and everyone of us once we voted.
Once we voted, we made a decision,
but it doesn't mean that you have to agree with this decision.
You can keep having and defending your own point of view, as I do it here.
For instance, someone who would say: "I defend the right that one has to propose sexual services"...
— some people defend this idea, and defending this idea is not forbidden.
What is forbidden is to put it into practice.
Well that's the law for now.
And it's right
So the rule for me is that if each of us has the control over his own body, and more importantly over himself ,
— it's not just about having control over our body, it's about having control over ourselves —
as is the case for abortion — the right to abortion to be precise, and not abortion itself —
— no one supports abortion, we support the right to abortion —
it's because we consider that people's body, women in this case...
Women's body are not the property of their husband,their children, or society.
They have to be sovereign over their own body.
— sovereignty means emancipation, they decide on their own.
And in those conditions, I am opposed to...
— it's my political opinion, there is no rule of nature that confirms what I am about to tell you —
I am opposed to the commodification of the body, whatever the kind.
So I am opposed to surrogacy, for instance, because surrogacy is always a trade.
Don't tell me it's not!
Well there is always an exceptional case or two that contradict this,
like a sister that gives birth for her own sister — I can understand that —
but I'm still waiting to see a billionaire who decides to give birth for a poor woman from a slum.
If I ever see this happen, I'll agree with the idea that carrying a baby for someone else has become so natural and spontaneous
that it deserves to be reconsidered, but it has never happened until now.
Surrogacy is a disgusting and immoral trade.
It turns the body of surrogate mothers — who carry a child against money — into a mean of production.
I don't agree with this.
In the same way... the same logic,
I am opposed to prostitution, which consists in selling one's body to someone else,
and in the same logic, I am opposed to the selling of organs and blood.
This is why I agree with the French system
— it's not the case in every country —
in which blood and organ donations are free.
Someone's body should never become a commodity.
This is the idea, and although there seems to be a formal contradiction,
it is the same thing from a logical, moral and philosophical point of view.
So thank you @FishK for asking this very interesting, philosophical question.
The next question is from @Shisui Uchiwa.
"Do you think that making voting mandatory would be a good political measure ?"
Yes I do!
So, I have to explain this.
Some people say: "No, it's an individual liberty, we can decide not to vote"
This happens in certain assemblies sometimes.
Those who don't want to vote raise their hand.
But... the idea is that...
...it is necessary to decide.
We need to make decisions.
And to make the right decisions, we need to make them as collectively as possible.
The more we are to think and give an opinion, the better the opinion.
It's a...
...a wager.
'Wager' is not the correct word but let's say...
It's the idea that we are more intelligent collectively than individually.
Let's take an absurd example.
Suppose everyone decides not to vote except one person: he rules and does whatever he wants.
You see there's something wrong, here.
This is why everyone's vote is necessary.
And since it is necessary, then it's mandatory.
So of course, it's not about making people vote for someone they don't want to vote for.
Voting is mandatory.
If you do not vote, you are punished...
through different means.
But you should keep the right not to participate to take part in the vote in the sense that...
— "Listen, I really don't like any of the candidates, and my way to express my discontent is to cast a NOTA vote".
We have to take into account NOTA votes.
But NOTA votes are not neutral.
They're the expression of an opinion.
They say: "I do not like any of those candidates!"
"The question that is asked in this referendum is not the right one,"
"and I do not agree with having a debate over this issue, so I'll cast a NOTA vote".
We have to count NOTA votes in the final result.
We could even decide that a decision that was taken by a minority cannot be carried out.
In other words, if 50 % of voters voted NOTA, then we consider that...
— since 50+1=51 —
then we consider that the vote is purely and simply annuled,
because so many NOTA votes would be considered a political opinion.
So it's important to be precise on all these points,
and I hope I was clear enough.
Now the next question...
@Vivien Lyxoo — since there are two O's, I guess I should pronounce "oo"...
@Vivien Lyx00:
"What is you opinion on the 500 sponsors system that prevents some independent candidates to run for president?"
"If you are elected President of the Republic,
would you lower the required number of sponsors?"
"Would you repeal this 500 sponsors system?"
Or would you replace it with a different system?
Here is my answer.
Of course, I am opposed to this 500 sponsors system,
but you have to know why it was created to begin with.
It was created in 1965,
because it is in 1965 that direct universal suffrage was adopted for the first timee in France.
There was several candidates, and some of them were considered "extravagant".
There was a guy, a very nice and respectable small business boss named Marcel Barbu,
and this guy would cry when he spoke on TV.
He was emotional, because the issues he talked about...
— it was considered a strange thing to see this in a presidential election.
At the time, TV was not as normal as it is now.
Nowadays, it is not only normal, but people are individually accustomed to use images,
by filming their family or themselves,
so images no longer have the same petrifying effect as in the past.
And... in fact, anyone can feel like running for President of the Republic,
and I don't want to criticize this,
but do all those who want to run for president have to do it...?
So what kind of filter could we create?
Not this one, because it is the worst possible filter!
A candidate needs to be sponsored by 500 elected representatives in order to run for for president,
and not all the elected representatives, but some of them!
Departmental and regional councillors, deputies, senators and mayors can do it.
And mayors only, not town councillors nor deputy mayors.
So this decision is absolutely individual,
but these elected representatives never asked anyone to give them this power.
They are asked to guarantee the smooth democratic progress of an election.
This is a huge responsibility!
I know small town councils that organized a vote to prevent the mayor from sponsoring a candidate.
First, this is not a normal practice, and if every mayor did that, there wouldn't be any candidate at all!
So, the system that consists in being sponsored by "great representatives"
- I don't know why they're called like that because other representatives aren't unimportant -
is a bigwig system, meaning that bigwigs decide.
This election is extremely monarchical to begin with...
It is a stunting election.
They say that in the first round you choose, and in the secound round you elimiate,
but these are just words, and the truth is that we end up with a democratically dreary result.
So we can't continue with this system, but we can't say anyone can run for president either,
because it would be unmanageable,
and it would allow weird candidacies, and I don't think it would be very funny.
Anyway, we must put an end to this fixed election system.
There was a proposition in a parliamentary report that had been written at Lionel Jospin's request
that was concerned with the democratization of the 5th Republic.
I took this proposition over, and it said that if 150,000 citizens sponsored a candidate
then this candidate could run for president.
These 150,000 citizens are supposed to give their ID and their poll card number.
I don't think you can find 150,000 people just like that,
but if you think this figure is too low, we can choose a higher one, that's fine with me.
To me, this method is more democratic for the simple reason that you have to campaign to convince voters.
If you're not even capable of convincing 150,000 people to sponsor you for an election,
then it's useless to stand as a candidate to an election, because you need much more than 150,000 voters to become president.
You need millions of voters to become president.
So this was my answer, but to be honest, I should add something.
I advocate the establishment of a 6th Republic, and to do that, to write the new constitutional rule,
we will have to convene a constituent assembly.
So it won't be up to me the President of the Republic to say what's in the constitution,
but it will be the task of the constituent assembly.
I did my best to answer your question.
The next question is from @Corentin Torres.
"Mr. Mélenchon, my question is probably pointless, but I have been thinking about it for a while".
"What does the "phi" symbol mean to you? Why did you choose it as the symbol of your campaign?"
OK, so... I'll tell you the true story.
I already answered this question, but I'll do it gain, because it enables you to clearly understand the idea.
We were looking for a symbol that would encapsulate...
our slogans and the way we are.
Traditional parties often have a symbol.
For instance, the Communist Party's symbol is the hammer and sickle, it's...
It's an old symbol.
The Socialist Party's symbol is the rose in the fist.
Now the National Front's new symbol is a blue rose...
They borrowed it from the Socialist Party.
There's a sort of stem that looks like a tombstone...
All the parties have a symbol, but what is the point of having a symbol?
Well it is supposed to encapsulate the spirit of a party,
but above all, it is very useful because you can put them on ballot papers
and it enables voters to identify the ballots.
Of course, the symbol had better have a meaning, otherwise people don't remember it.
So there are symbols on ballot papers.
We were looking for one.
After we discussed it, we finally agreed upon one of them, but it wasn't the symbol I had chosen.
We had the simple idea that the initial letters of "France Insoumise" (Rebel/Unsubdued France) were F and I.
F. I. = FI
And there's a Greek letter called "phi".
It is the letter that you can see on our posters.
So... we thought that this idea was great, because the Greek letter "phi"...
The European democracy was born in Greece.
Secondly, the "phi" letter is the symbol of philosophy.
"Sophia" means "knowledge" in Greek.
And... Well...
It's a beautiful symbol, because philosophy means "love of wisdom".
It is the idea that we think about what we do and that we choose wisdom.
It might be a bit pretentious, but what matters is the idea.
Finally, the letter "phi" turns out to be the letter that corresponds to a figure
that represents the harmonious proportion in nature.
This is a very strange thing to know, but it's the truth.
1,61 is a proportion that exists in nature and when you encounter this proportion...
For instance...
It is called the golden ratio.
For instance, take a series of photos or drawings or whatever you want, then show it to people,
and statistically, most people will choose the paintings, drawings or photos designed with the golden ratio,
because the eye and the mind focus on things that are harmonious.
So the letter "phi" represents the idea of harmony.
And to us members of "La France Insoumise", harmony is above all the harmony between man and nature,
between human beings and nature,
but also the harmony in the relations between human beings.
Equality is closer to harmony than the violence of the domination of some over others.
The domination of some over others is not harmony, but violence.
This is why the letter "phi" seemed so important to us.
If you look at it closely, you see that we write it like that.
You start by putting your finger on the paper, so the line is a bit thicker, and then you make a circle,
and there is the "phi" letter.
All those who went up to their last year of high school...
wrote this letter at least once in their life to indicate the philosophy course,
since every student attends a philosophy course during the last year of high school, except in vocational education,
in which it is replaced by a course called "civic, law and social education",
a course that I put in the curriculum back when I was the Minister of Vocational Education.
That's all for the symbol of the letter "phi".
So...
@Gaëtan Thomas:
"How are we going to move from productivist to sustainable agriculture?"
"How do you intend to convince farmers?"
I'm not going to explain to you the whole plan to describe the type of agriculture we want to implement,
but we can at least say that we will implement it!
So...
In a way, we are going to meet a demand.
We are going to organize this demand step by step.
For instance, we are going to decide that the whole catering industry
- we'll begin with school canteens and then we'll take care of the rest -
has to use products from organic farming.
Of course, we will have to find a definition of what is and what is not organic,
and this definition has to be strict enough to control the agricultural production.
Of course, you understood that this could not be done in the blink of an eye, which is why you asked this question.
But you focused on the issue of how to convince farmers.
To be honest, this is no longer a problem,
because most farmers are already convinced.
It's just that they cannot move to organic farming. Why is that?
It's because they're all heavily indebted,
because they were encouraged to adopt a productivist farming model that prevents them from backing off.
They have to pay, so they're forced to produce huge quantities of food that are determined in advance,
and whose conditions of production are often imposed by those who lent them money
to produce these huge quantities of food.
So we will convince farmers using two methods.
First...
we'll make sure that the demand meet the offer,
meaning we will ask organic production for the catering industry, it's the example I used.
We'll pay for it, of course.
And we'll increase the number of organic farmers.
But listen, this simply means that we'll  have to increase the number of producers, and not just organic farmers,
because what we call small size, ecological agriculture requires more workers.
We calculated that we would need 4 M farmers to implement this agricultural model,
but there are only 900,000 farms today, so you see that we'll need a lot of farmers.
The increase in the number of farmers shall be as sharp as possible, but also progressive,
which means that lots of students will register at agricultural high schools.
A lot of young people already want to work the land, rear cattle and work in agriculture.
I think that if people hear of the fact that from now on, thousands and thousands of jobs will be created,
we should be able to find hundreds of thousand people who will start learning.
So there will be a transitional period during which farmers will be able to change their production methods,
and they will, because we will examine each case individually to adjust production
and to face the problem of debts, although this won't be the hardest part.
The most important aspect is to change production methods, because in the future,
we could decide to implement a system in which we would call "organic food" all non-specific food,
and all the rest would be called "non-organic".
Let me tell you that the effect would be devastating!
Suppose you had to choose between two apples and that one of them is labeled "non-organic".
I bet you would buy the other apple.
So there won't be any choice.
There won't be any alternative to this decision.
We will move to organic agriculture, period!
We will do it as we did the opposite before.
They decided that we would move to productivist agriculture, period.
They didn't say "Those who don't want, just keep doing what you did".
Those who wanted to do as before did it at their own risk,
and they often went through periods of great distress, of poverty and finally had to stop.
This plan will create a lot of jobs and improve people's health.
We can't keep dealing with the issue of food as we do it today.
We can't keep saying "As long as the shelves of supermarkets are full, everything is OK".
I already told this anecdote several times, but it's a pity to know that in the 50's,
an apple contained as many vitamins as a hundred apples today.
In other words, if you want your kids to be as healthy in the future as I am now,
they'll have to eat a hundred apples, whereas I just needed to eat one to get the same amount of vitamins.
As you can see...
This example is a bit of a caricature, but it illustrates why junk food is absurd, because its effects are irreversible.
Now there's a slightly more frivolous question.
Two frivolous questions, actually.
"Do you think pétanque (boules) should be an Olympic sport?"
Yes.
Why?
I don't know!
I think it's cool.
The way I see it, it looks like a sport.
And if pétanque is not a sport, then what is a sport?
It requires agility and precision, things that...
What could I compare pétanque with? Archery maybe...
Anyway, it looks like a good idea!
Next frivolous question...
I said it was a frivolous question,
so no need to leave ten comments to reproach me for answering frivolous questions!
I know it!
Now...
I forgot to tell you the name of the guy who asked the question about pétanque!
His name is Lubin. Now I said it!
@Delubin
Good.
The next question is from @LeSceptique.
What a name!
It is spelled S - c - p...
S - c - p t - l - T - V
Well, dear ScptlTV, here is your question.
"Where did you buy that coat? We've seen it since the beginning of the channel. It caught my eye."
First, it's not a coat.
It's a jacket, all right?
Please show some respect.
Second, why is your question about the coat, and not about my shirt?
I also have a shirt.
A white shirt.
So I'll answer the question you did not ask:
"Where does the shirt come from?"
And maybe I won't answer the question about the coat,
because it's not a coat!
So, my shirt is a waiter's shirt.
I wear them because waiters always have to remain neat and clean, although they run around all the time.
Maybe you didn't notice,
but people in the hospitality industry are always running around, and yet they always look clean.
If they weren't, you would not go back to the restaurants or the cafés they work at.
I realized that,
and I wondered how come I was always bathed in sweat when I was giving a speech.
I must lose around 2 or 3 pounds per meeting...
— I regain them very quickly, unfortunately —
2 or 3 pounds of water.
Therefore, I'd better wear shirts that look clean.
That's why I buy shirts used in the hospitality industry.
Why are they so different?
First, they're clean. Second, they're cheap.
Third... I feel fine in these shirts.
What shirt brand do I buy?
The brand is Braggard.
And when you go to a Braggard store, you're asked to stand in line with professionals — that's what I do!
There's one on  Faubourg Saint Martin street.
There are probably other stores, but that's the one I go to.
As to the coat — although it's a jacket —
it is also a jacket for professionals.
It is made out of moleskin.
Moleskin is a fabric that was used to make SNCF train seats.
The good thing with moleskin is that it can't get creased.
For someone like me who's always on the road, in a car or in a train,
well normally, it doesn't get creased.
But it's not just any jacket!
It's not just any jacket!
It is also a jacket for professionals.
It is a roofer's jacket.
Roofers get on top of houses' roofs to cover them with tiles.
This jacket is used by professionals who do a hard and dangerous job.
It's very...
Roofers don't have much time...
Their jacket always has to be OK in order to find the key,
the tool or the hook they need.
So this jacket suits intellectuals well, because it has large pockets.
I sewed them to keep them tight,
but usually, I put newspapers in them, or my notebook, or my pen and all...
There are pockets inside and on the chest,
and some models have special pockets for hooks,
but I chose the simplest model.
I hope I answered your question.
If you want to buy a roofer's jacket, all you need to do is look on Google
to find the stores that sell them and the companies that make them.
I have two or three of them, and I think I'll buy some more,
because I really like some of them.
These jackets are for professionals.
"I will vote for you, mainly because you deal with ecoogy" — thank you! —
"and I'd like to know how you intend to phase out nuclear power?"
Well, it's simple!
In a way, all we need to do is take the decision!
And we have to do it quick, because we lost a lot of time.
And of course, the more we linger, the more it will take time to do it,
because there are two aspects to phasing out nuclear power.
There's the stopping of nuclear production of electricity on the one hand,
and this immediately raises a problem, because we have to replace it with renewable energies.
100 % renewable energies must be our objective,
but you have to understand that we will do it progressively.
I'm not going to tell you: "Listen, we're going to stop all the nuclear power plants in the country tomorrow,"
"and then we'll see".
We couldn't do that!
It could cause the collapse of the electricity network.
When we close a nuclear power plant, we have to have the steady equivalent of energy production.
So it's all about planning.
Planning means organizing and connecting decisions and the means to carry them out.
That's the way we'll do it.
Once we stopped a nuclear power plant,
— which means that we've replaced it with renewable energies — then we have to dismantle it,
and let me tell you that it is one more reason to massively fund nuclear research.
Why? Because we need to cool nuclear waste.
We'll have to wait several thousand years before nuclear waste's radioactivity decays.
The only way we can cool nuclear waste is to fund nuclear research, it won't cool on its own.
So it'll take time.
It'll take time, and that's precisely the problem.
As to dismantling a nuclear power plant, it is a very complicated operation.
Everything that is dismantled has to be transformed into waste,
and this waste has to be as harmless as possible, although completely harmless waste doesn't exist.
So that's the way we'll proceed,
and that's not the easiest part.
And contrary to what some simpletons say,
phasing out nuclear energy doesn't mean we'll have to use candles again.
On the contrary, we'll have to make huge technological leaps to replace it,
but let me reassure you, we know how to do this, we can replace it with renewable energies.
Our problem is neither finding renewable energies,
nor how to make them work effeciciently enough according to our needs.
Our only problem is to organize the phasing out of nuclear energy.
Renewable energies already are available.
For instance, the motion of the sea contains 75 times the energy that our planet needs
to keep our civilization of waste going.
As you can see, it's not so complicated.
Our problem is not to find the means.
Our problem is to carry them out.
So we can do this, and we will.
Now...
Now @WALDURCK and @MrShadow649 have a question.
@MrShadow649 is the friend of @MrShadow648.
And he's also the friend of @MrShadow650.
Enough with jokes.
So...
"What is your opinion on the current state of education?
What changes would you make?"
And @MrShadow649's question is:
"Mr. Mélenchon, I couldn't find any clear measures on education in your program".
Well...
"Could you explain them in details in your next FAQ video?"
Well, no. I can't.
To do that, I would need to give a whole speech.
But I'll take your criticism into account.
If you made it, it means that you have questions.
If you don't understand our program,
then we'll have to do it more seriously.
We'll discuss this as soon as the booklet on education comes out.
Because a booklet on education will come out.
The program you know, "L'Avenir en commun" (Common Future) does not answer every question right now.
It deals with every domain, but it did doesn't go into details,
so there wil be booklets about each domain
— and I don't mean that education is a detail!
To us, it is the core of society's good functionning with social security, that protects people.
Education is the core of human beings' development.
Here's another question — could someone use a French name, a name I could read at a glance?
D- A - W - S.
I guess I should pronounce"Daws"...
Come on , please...
This is a nice pseudonym, but it's not easy to read!
So: "Hello Mr. Mélenchon, do you think highways should be nationalized? Why?"
This is a good question, because we forgot about the fact that the privatization of highways was a scandal!
All the French paid for these facilities — at least those who had a car, everytime they stopped at a tollbooth!
I know there's an ecological criticism that consists n saying that the more highways, the more cars,
and of course, the more cars, the more pollution.
And above all, the more cars, the more we need highways, and so on.
So we clearly see that this is a vicious circle,
but for now, we still have these highway companies,
and everyday, people keep paying for the profits of these companies when they stop at a tollbooth
To me, when the time comes, our majority MPs will have to create a parliamentary commission of inquiry
in order to shed light on the reasons why and the conditions in which highways were sold,
and on the problems caused by this sale.
There are lots of politicians that say that this privatization was a scandal.
Highway companies raised toll rates but they didn't make any additional investment.
Highway companies are like other companies — and some of them were very straightforward!
They said they would put money for five years in order to pay off their investment,
in other words, to yield the highest returns they could get, but they did not intend to make investments at all.
This is why I intend to nationalize highways,
because highways were everyone's property,
and to me, they were sold at an absurdly cheap price.
It's not possible to assess the price of something at a given moment
when it is supposed to function for 20 or 30 years.
This is an illusion.
The market price my foot!
And what is the market price of Mont Blanc?
You don't know it? Well there you are!
Some do apparently!
They would be capable of selling Mont Blanc!
Now I'll conclude with two questions.
These questions are very important for my staff!
The first question...
...is from @Atsuhikodji.
Thank you for choosing a simple pseudonym!
@Atsuhikodji and @T B Nax.
@Atsuhikodji asked:
"What is the name of the cat..."
"...that appeared in your last video?"
I like this question.
I expected the next question to be "What is the color of Henri IV's white horse?" (famous French expression),
but no, @Atsuihikodji asked for the name of the cat in the last video.
And @T B Nax's question is:
"What is your cat's name? :-)"
And there's a smiley face emoji at the end.
This emoji is a bit old-fashioned, because it is composed of colons, a hyphen and a bracket.
You should know that there are automatically generated emojis now.
You should keep up on emojis @T B Nax!
OK, so... it's written — this is not a joke! —
@A communist: "I have a very serious question..."
— so the guy had fun!
"What is the cat's name?"
So the cat is an important subject for you.
I promise that we'll give it some deep thought!